@c Copyright (C) 2000-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Author: Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 2006-02-02 (file up to date)

@c This file defines the following macros for the GPC Manual.
@c They are suitable for both HTML and non-HTML versions.
@c
@c @@NOTE: All calls of any of them must be contained entirely
@c         within one line, including arguments.
@c
@c @localuref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
@c Like `@uref' for references within the GPC web page. Currently
@c only provided with 2 arguments.
@c
@c @anch{NAME}
@c Create an HTML anchor. Ignored in non-HTML versions.
@c @@NOTE: Calls of `@anch' *must* be on a line of their own
@c         (problem with texinfo 1.6[12]). If they don't, you won't
@c         get an error, just buggy output, so beware ...
@c
@c @hrefexample{FILENAME}
@c Reference to a GPC demo program.
@c
@c @xhrefexample{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
@c Like `@hrefexample', but with a specific description instead of
@c `Example'.
@c
@c @htmlhrule
@c Horizontal rule (HTML only)
@c
@c @htmlbrclear
@c Do a `<br clear="all">' in HTML, nothing otherwise.

@ifclear macrosset
@set macrosset

@ifhtml

@macro localuref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
@uref{../\FILENAME\,\DESCRIPTION\}
@end macro

@macro anch{NAME}
@anchor{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro xhrefexample{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
@uref{../demos/\FILENAME\,[\DESCRIPTION\]}
@end macro

@macro htmlhrule
@html
<hr>
@end html
@end macro

@macro htmlbrclear
@html
<br clear="all">
@end html
@end macro

@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml

@macro localuref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
\DESCRIPTION\ (@file{\FILENAME\} on GPC's WWW home page)
@end macro

@macro anch{NAME}
@end macro

@macro xhrefexample{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
[\DESCRIPTION\ (\FILENAME\)]
@end macro

@macro htmlhrule
@end macro

@macro htmlbrclear
@end macro

@end ifnothtml

@macro hrefexample{FILENAME}
@xhrefexample{\FILENAME\,Example}
@end macro

@end ifclear
