@c Copyright (C) 1996-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Authors: Peter Gerwinski <peter@gerwinski.de>
@c          Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 2006-02-02 (file up to date)

@include macros.texi

@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
@node Acknowledgments
@appendix Contributors to GNU Pascal.
@cindex Acknowledgments
@cindex contributors
@cindex authors
@cindex team
@end ifclear

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
@include version.texi
@c Note: The following line gets inserted into the destination file,
@c       it does not apply to this Texinfo file!
This file was generated automatically from authors.texi.@*
@sc{DO NOT CHANGE THIS FILE MANUALLY!}

@settitle Register of Copyrights for GNU Pascal
@node Top
@chapter Register of Copyrights for GNU Pascal
@end ifset

@table @asis
@item Jukka Virtanen
invented GNU Pascal in March 1988, implemented the ISO 7185 and most
of the ISO 10206 standard, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created all files except those listed below, based on the GCC
source.
@end ifset

@item @uref{http://www.gerwinski.de/~peter/,Dr.@: Peter Gerwinski}
@anch{peter}@c
added Borland Pascal related and other extensions to GNU Pascal in
summer 1995, ported GPC to EMX, did most of the development of the
compiler from 1996 to 2001, created the WWW home page, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{rts/move.pas}, the files in @file{doc/} (together
with Jan-Jaap), the (former) files in @file{config/emx/} and
@file{gpc-nodes.def}, and extensively modified all files.
@end ifset

@item Jan-Jaap van der Heijden
ported GPC to DJGPP and to Microsoft Windows 95/NT, added ELF
support in spring 1996, solved a lot of configuration and
compatibility problems, created the GPC FAQ, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{Make-lang.in}, @file{lang-options.h},
@file{lang-specs.h}, the files in @file{doc/} (together with Peter),
@file{rts/Make*}, and @file{rts/config*}, and modified
@file{module.c} and most other files.
@end ifset

@item @uref{http://fjf.gnu.de,Frank Heckenbach}
@anch{frank}@c
rewrote and maintains the Run Time System since July 1997, does most
of the development of the compiler since July 2001, wrote most of
the units, demo programs, scripts and utilities distributed with
GPC, wrote many test programs, maintains the GPC To-Do list
@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
(@pxref{To Do})
@end ifclear
and the WWW home page, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @samp{gpc-options.h}, most files in @file{units/},
@file{demos/}, @file{script/}, @samp{utils/} and @file{rts/} and
many files in @file{test/}, and extensively modified all files.
@end ifset

@item Waldek Hebisch
made GPC compatible with gcc-3.1.1 and later backend versions, fixed
backend problems on various targets and improved the frontend in the
areas of structured initializers, qualified identifiers, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @samp{p-tree.def}, @samp{diffs/gcc-3.*.diff} and modified
@samp{Make-lang.in} and all source files of the compiler as well as
some files of the backend.
@end ifset

@item @uref{http://www.bigfoot.com/~african_chief/,Prof.@: Abimbola A.@: Olowofoyeku (``The African Chief'')}
created the original versions of many BP compatibility units in May
1997, contributed code to other units and the Run Time System,
helped porting GPC and the units to Cygwin, mingw and MSYS, wrote a
number of test programs, contributed a Borland Delphi-compatible
@samp{SysUtils} @uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.de/contrib/chief/,unit},
etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{units/gpcutil.pas}, parts of
@file{units/system.pas} and @file{rts/fname.pas} and a number of
files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Nicholas Burrett
fixed some bugs and cleaned up GPC in May 1998, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{expressions.c}, @file{parse.y}, @file{module.c}
and some other files.
@end ifset

@item Dominik Freche
improved and extended the GPC manual in August -- September 1999 and
wrote conversion routines for Borland compatible 6 Byte floating
point numbers in December 1999.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{doc/en/reference.texi},
@file{doc/en/programming.texi}, and @file{units/system.pas} and
created some files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Alexey Volokhov
improved the performance of GPC's module/unit support in June 1997.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He extensively modified @file{module.c}.
@end ifset

@item Bill Currie
implemented more Borland extensions into GPC in July 1997.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{parse.y}, @file{statements.c}, and @file{predef.c}.
@end ifset

@item Nicola Girardi
wrote the GNU Pascal Coding Standards in November 2001, contributed
a @uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.de/contrib/nicola/,GPC unit} for the
@samp{svgalib} graphics library for some platforms in February 2000,
provided some portability enhancements to the RTS.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{doc/en/gpcs.texi} and modified @samp{rts/rts.c} and
created some files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Eike Lange
@anch{Eike}@c
wrote an internationalization unit, translated the GNU Pascal Coding
Standards into German and worked on the documentation.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{units/intl.pas}, @file{units/intlc.c},
@file{doc/de/gpcs.texi} and @file{doc/en/copying-demo.texi} and
modified @file{doc/en/gpcs.texi} and @samp{doc/en/programming.texi}.
@end ifset

@item Mirsad Todorovac
@anch{mirsad}@c
translated the GPC documentation into Croatian and contributed code
to the run time system.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created all files in @file{doc/hr/} and several files in
@file{test/} and modified @file{rts/string1.pas}.
@end ifset

@item Francisco Javier Fernandez Serrador
@anch{Francisco}@c
translated the GPC documentation into Spanish.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created all files in @file{doc/es/}.
@end ifset

@item Maurice Lombardi
maintains the DJGPP port of GPC, improved the numerical routines for
real and complex numbers and improved and extended the GMP real
routines.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{rts/math.pas}, @file{units/gmp.pas},
@file{demos/gettextdemo.pas} and created @file{test/dostest.bat} and
several other files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Emil Jerabek
improved the numerical routines for real and complex numbers.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{rts/math.pas} and created several files in
@file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Adriaan van Os
helped with the port of GPC to Mac OS X and set up a
@uref{http://www.microbizz.nl/gpc.html,web site} with sources,
binaries, patches and building instructions for this platform, and
helped with Mac Pascal dialect support in GPC, since January 2003.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He made small changes to most source files of the compiler and
created several files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Neil Santos

@end table

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
@noindent All authors listed above have assigned their copyright of
past and future changes of GNU Pascal to the Free Software
Foundation (FSF).
@end ifset

@table @asis

@item James A. Morrison
helps porting GPC to GCC-4.x backends since February 2005.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified all files of the compiler as well as
@samp{Make-lang.in}.

He has assigned his copyright of past and future changes of GCC to
the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
@end ifset

@item Russell Whitaker
updated and maintained the GNU Pascal FAQ.
@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
(@pxref{FAQ})
@end ifclear

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{doc/en/faq.texi}.

He has assigned his copyright of past and future changes of the GNU
Pascal FAQ to the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
@end ifset

@item Matthias Klose
integrated GPC into EGCS and Debian GNU/Linux in May 1998, improved
the installation process, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{Makefile*}, the @file{configure} script and many
other files.

He has disclaimed the copyright of his changes of GNU Pascal and
released them to the Public Domain.
@end ifset

@item Peter N Lewis
added support for Mac Pascal dialect specific features and improved
the documentation.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified most files of the compiler as well as
@file{doc/contributors.texi}, @file{doc/en/authors.texi},
@file{doc/en/programming.texi} and @file{doc/en/reference.texi}.

He has disclaimed the copyright of his changes of GNU Pascal and
released them to the Public Domain.
@end ifset

@item Orlando Llanes
provided some contributions to the manual in May 1998.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{doc/reference.texi}.

He has assigned his copyright of the past and future changes of the
GNU Pascal manual to the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
@end ifset

@end table

@ifclear AUTHORSONLY

@noindent The development of GNU Pascal profits a lot from
independent contributions:

@table @asis

@item Anja Gerwinski
maintains the GPC mailing list, since September 1999.

@item Berend de Boer
wrote a lot of useful documentation about Extended Pascal in 1995.

@item @uref{http://www.gerwinski.de/~markus/,Markus Gerwinski}
created the drawing showing a Gnu with Blaise Pascal
@ifhtml
@html
-- <a href="../images/GnuPascal-small.png">small (PNG, 1 kB)</a>
<a href="../images/GnuPascal.png">large (PNG, 10 kB)</a> --
@end html
@end ifhtml
and helped to design the WWW home page in October 1996.

@item Eike Lange
is writing a @uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.org/~eike/,book} about GPC
in German since March 2003.

@item Eike Lange
wrote
@uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.de/contrib/eike/,units} to
access MySQL, GNU DBM and PostgreSQL databases in August 2000, and a
unit (now part of GPC) and tools for internationalization in
October -- December 2001.

@item Eike Lange and Nicola Girardi
together contributed a set of
@uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.de/contrib/nicola/,GTK units} in
February -- May 2001.

@item Nicola Girardi
wrote the GNU Pascal Coding Standards in English. Eike Lange
translated them to German.

@item Prof.@: Phil Nelson
created a bug reporting system for GPC in October 1996.

@item Robert Höhne
wrote @uref{http://www.rhide.com,RHIDE}, an integrated development
environment for GNU compilers running under Dos (DJGPP) and Linux,
and added support for GNU Pascal in autumn 1996.

@item Sven Hilscher
wrote a mostly BP compatible @samp{Graph} unit for several platforms
in December 1996, now part of the
@uref{http://www.gnu.de/software/grx/,GRX library}.

@item @uref{http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Vista/6573,Dario Anzani (``Predator Zeta'')}
contributed documentation about the use of assembler in GNU Pascal
in May 1997.
@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
(@pxref{Assembler})
@end ifclear

@item Dieter Schmitz
set up a German mailing list for GPC, @ref{Mailing List}, in March
2001.

@item @code{(@minus{}:@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}:@minus{})}
This space is reserved for @emph{your} name. ;@minus{}) Please
contact us at the GPC mailing list, @ref{Mailing List}, if you have
something interesting for us.

@end table

@noindent We thank everybody who supports us by reporting bugs,
providing feedback, contributing knowledge and good ideas, donating
development tools, and giving us the opportunity to test GPC on a
large variety of systems. We are particularly indebted (in
alphabetical order, individuals first) to

@include contributors.texi
the @cite{BIP} at the @cite{University of Birmingham}, UK,
the @cite{Institut fuer Festkoerperforschung (IFF)} at the @cite{Forschungszentrum Juelich}, Germany,
CARNet (Croatian Academic and Research NETwork), the Academy of Fine
Arts and the Faculty of Graphic Arts at the University of Zagreb,
Croatia,

@noindent and everybody we might have forgotten to mention here.
Thanks to all of you!

@c The following text should appear in all versions of the manual,
@c but not on the GPC home page.
@ifhtml
@html
<!--MAKE-HOMEPAGE-CUT-->
@end html
@end ifhtml

@noindent GNU Pascal is based on GNU CC by Richard Stallman. Several
people have contributed to GNU CC:

@c -- JJ 13jul96: should we keep all these ?
@c I already zapped a number of irrelevant ones.
@c
@c Keep them, but with a note that we are talking about GNU C now.
@c (I zapped another one who contributed to the C++ front-end.)
@c (Or: ask the FSF.) -- PG, 2. Aug 1996

@itemize @bullet
@item
The idea of using RTL and some of the optimization ideas came from
the program PO written at the University of Arizona by Jack Davidson
and Christopher Fraser.  See ``Register Allocation and Exhaustive
Peephole Optimization'', Software Practice and Experience 14 (9),
Sept. 1984, 857-866.

@item
Paul Rubin wrote most of the preprocessor.

@item
Leonard Tower wrote parts of the parser, RTL generator, and RTL
definitions, and of the Vax machine description.

@item
Ted Lemon wrote parts of the RTL reader and printer.

@item
Jim Wilson implemented loop strength reduction and some other
loop optimizations.

@item
Nobuyuki Hikichi of Software Research Associates, Tokyo, contributed
the support for the Sony NEWS machine.

@item
Charles LaBrec contributed the support for the Integrated Solutions
68020 system.

@item
Michael Tiemann of Cygnus Support wrote the support for inline
functions and instruction scheduling.  Also the descriptions of the
National Semiconductor 32000 series cpu, the SPARC cpu and part of
the Motorola 88000 cpu.

@item
Jan Stein of the Chalmers Computer Society provided support for
Genix, as well as part of the 32000 machine description.

@item
Randy Smith finished the Sun FPA support.

@item
Robert Brown implemented the support for Encore 32000 systems.

@item
David Kashtan of SRI adapted GNU CC to VMS.

@item
Alex Crain provided changes for the 3b1.

@item
Greg Satz and Chris Hanson assisted in making GNU CC work on HP-UX
for the 9000 series 300.

@item
William Schelter did most of the work on the Intel 80386 support.

@item
Christopher Smith did the port for Convex machines.

@item
Paul Petersen wrote the machine description for the Alliant FX/8.

@item
Dario Dariol contributed the four varieties of sample programs that
print a copy of their source.

@item
Alain Lichnewsky ported GNU CC to the Mips cpu.

@item
Devon Bowen, Dale Wiles and Kevin Zachmann ported GNU CC to the
Tahoe.

@item
Jonathan Stone wrote the machine description for the Pyramid
computer.

@item
Gary Miller ported GNU CC to Charles River Data Systems machines.

@item
Richard Kenner of the New York University Ultracomputer Research
Laboratory wrote the machine descriptions for the AMD 29000, the DEC
Alpha, the IBM RT PC, and the IBM RS/6000 as well as the support for
instruction attributes.  He also made changes to better support RISC
processors including changes to common subexpression elimination,
strength reduction, function calling sequence handling, and
condition code support, in addition to generalizing the code for
frame pointer elimination.

@item
Richard Kenner and Michael Tiemann jointly developed reorg.c, the
delay slot scheduler.

@item
Mike Meissner and Tom Wood of Data General finished the port to the
Motorola 88000.

@item
Masanobu Yuhara of Fujitsu Laboratories implemented the machine
description for the Tron architecture (specifically, the Gmicro).

@item
James van Artsdalen wrote the code that makes efficient use of the
Intel 80387 register stack.

@item
Mike Meissner at the Open Software Foundation finished the port to
the MIPS cpu, including adding ECOFF debug support, and worked on
the Intel port for the Intel 80386 cpu.

@item
Ron Guilmette implemented the @code{protoize} and @code{unprotoize}
tools, the support for Dwarf symbolic debugging information, and
much of the support for System V Release 4.  He has also worked
heavily on the Intel 386 and 860 support.

@item
Torbjorn Granlund implemented multiply- and divide-by-constant
optimization, improved long long support, and improved leaf function
register allocation.

@item
Mike Stump implemented the support for Elxsi 64 bit CPU.

@item
John Wehle added the machine description for the Western Electric
32000 processor used in several 3b series machines (no relation to
the National Semiconductor 32000 processor).

@end itemize
@end ifclear
