.\" Copyright (c) 1997-2006 Free Software Foundation         -*-Text-*-
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Set up \*(lq, \*(rq if -man hasn't already set it up.
.if @@\*(lq@ \{\
.	ds lq "
.	if t .ds lq ``
.	if !@@\(lq@ .ds lq "\(lq
.\}
.if @@\*(rq@ \{\
.	ds rq "
.	if t .ds rq ''
.	if !@@\(rq@ .ds rq "\(rq
.\}
.de Id
.ds Rv \\$3
.ds Dt \\$4
..
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.TH GPC 1 "\*(Dt" "GNU Tools" "GNU Tools"
.SH NAME
gpc \- GNU project Pascal Compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.RB "" gpc " [ "\c
.IR option\c
.RB " | "
.IR filename\c
.RB " ].\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This man page does not contain much information about GNU Pascal
because the unstructured man page format is not well suited for
documenting a large program such a GNU Pascal. You can find the
relevant information in the GNU Pascal Manual which is avilable in
Texinfo format and formats produced from it, such as HTML, Info and
DVI. To view the Info documentation, please run `\|\c
.B info -f gpc\c
\&\|' or open the info file `\|\c
.B gpc.info\c
\&\|' in your favourite info reader.
.PP
Up to date versions of the manual in various formats as well as the compiler
itself can always be found on the WWW at
.B http://www.gnu-pascal.de\c
\&.
.SH FILES
file.pas		Pascal source file
.br
file.p		Pascal source file
.br
file.pp		Pascal source file
.br
file.dpr		Pascal source file
.br
file.c		C source file
.br
file.s		assembly language file
.br
file.o		object file
.br
file.gpi		GNU Pascal Interface File
.br
a.out		linked executable (by default)
.br
\fILIBDIR\fR/gpcpp	preprocessor
.br
\fILIBDIR\fR/gpc1	compiler proper
.br
\fILIBDIR\fR/collect2	linker front end needed on some machines
.br
\fILIBDIR\fR/libgcc.a	GCC subroutine library
.br
\fILIBDIR\fR/libgpc.a	GPC runtime library
.sp
.I LIBDIR
is usually
.B /usr/local/lib/\c
.IR machine / version .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gcc(1), cpp(1), as(1), ld(1), gdb(1), adb(1), dbx(1), sdb(1).
.br
.RB "`\|" gpc "\|', `\|" gcc "\|', `\|" cpp "\|',
.RB "`\|" as "\|', `\|" ld "\|',
and
.RB "`\|" gdb "\|'
entries in
.B info\c
\&.
.br
.I
The GNU Pascal Manual\c
, Jan-Jaap van der Heijden, Peter Gerwinski, Frank Heckenbach & others;
.I
Using and Porting GNU CC\c
, Richard M. Stallman;
.I
The C Preprocessor\c
, Richard M. Stallman;
.I
Debugging with GDB: the GNU Source-Level Debugger\c
, Richard M. Stallman and Roland H. Pesch;
.I
Using as: the GNU Assembler\c
, Dean Elsner, Jay Fenlason & friends;
.I
gld: the GNU linker\c
, Steve Chamberlain and Roland Pesch.

.SH BUGS
For instructions on how to report bugs, see the GNU Pascal manual.

.SH COPYING

Copyright (c) 1997-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.

.SH AUTHORS
See the GNU Pascal Manual for the contributors to GNU Pascal.
