@c Copyright (C) 2002-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Author: Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 2006-02-02 (file up to date)

@node To Do
@chapter The GNU Pascal To-Do List.

This is the To-Do list for the GNU Pascal Compiler.

The GNU Pascal development team is constantly working on making GNU
Pascal more reliable and more comfortable. However, there are some
known bugs which will take some time to be fixed (any help
welcome!), and we do not want to hide them from you. You might also
be interested to know what features are planned to be implemented in
the future. This list is meant to keep track of the known bugs and
wanted features of GPC.

If you want to report a new bug or suggest a new feature, the best
way to do it is in the mailing list. This way, other GPC users can
provide additional ideas, perhaps work-arounds for bugs, and the GPC
maintainers can sooner start to think about how to solve the
problem. The GPC mailing list is @email{gpc@@gnu.de}. To subscribe,
send the command @samp{subscribe gpc your@@email.address} in the
body of a mail to @email{majordomo@@gnu.de} (the subject is
ignored). An archive of the mailing list can be found at
@uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.de/crystal/gpc/en/}.

The list changes regularly. The present version refers to the
current GPC snapshot, @value{GPCVersion}.

This list is part of the GNU Pascal Manual, included in GPC
distributions and snapshots. You can always browse the most current
version of the list on GPC's WWW page. If you check the To-Do list
regularly you can decide if and when to try a new snapshort.

@menu
* Known Bugs::        Known bugs in GPC
* Planned Features::  Features planned for GPC
* Fixed Bugs::        Fixed bugs
@end menu

@node Known Bugs
@section Known bugs in GPC

In this section, you can find information about GPC bugs that are
known to the developers.

If you encounter a bug with GPC, please check whether it is one of
the known bugs. If not, report it to the GNU Pascal mailing list.
(But always report if you solve the problem! :@minus{})

Solved problems are moved to ``Fixed Bugs'' (@pxref{Fixed Bugs}),
and implemented features to the ``News'' chapter (@pxref{News}).

A message ID (like @samp{<42@@foo.bar>}) refers to a message in the
GPC mailing list or a newsgroup where the topic was discussed (often
a bug report). A note of the form @file{(xy20001231)} refers to an
internal message of the GPC developers. A file name like
@file{(foo42.pas)} refers to the according program in the GPC test
suite included in the GPC source distribution.

@itemize @bullet
@item @samp{setlimit} is applied when it shouldn't be ((a) variable/constant declarations, (b) @samp{set of ShortCard}) ???
@item dynamic sets don't work
@item there are some bugs with mathematical functions; GPC fails, for example, the Paranoia test (@uref{http://www.netlib.org/paranoia/index.html})
@end itemize

@node Planned Features
@section Features planned for GPC

In the following sections, you can find informations about features
which have been suggested and/or discussed for inclusion into GPC,
usually in the GPC mailing list. The division into the sections and
the names of the sections may change when this seems useful. The
entries within each section are in no particular order.

Some of the entries may be a bit difficult to read. Double question
marks (@samp{??}) within the entries mean that it's not yet clear
how to do the thing. Triple question marks (@samp{???}) mean that
it's not clear whether to do it at all. ;@minus{})

@menu
* Planned - Strings::            String types
* Planned - OOP::                Object oriented programming extensions
* Planned - Other types::        Other types
* Planned - Misc::               Miscellaneous GPC topics
* Planned - Utilities::          Useful utilities for GPC
@end menu

@node Planned - Strings
@subsection Planned features: Strings

@itemize @bullet
@item const/var @samp{AnyString} parameters and pointers (records internally, cf. gpc.pas) (GetCapacity; only for var parameters)
@item @samp{SetLength} for non-Pascal string types; use truncate-flag
@item make work on all string types: string functions from @file{rts/string*.pas}, @samp{Concat}/@samp{+} (Optimize @samp{s := s + ch}) (fh19971105)
@item option @samp{--arrays-of-char-as-cstrings=@{none,zero-based,all@}} to allow assigning [zero-based] arrays of char to cstring variables (warning otherwise) (cstrini2.pas); make padding of those arrays in initialized variables and in assignments dependent on this switch (fh19970921) (fjf57.pas, ok) and if the length matches exactly, give a warning (fh19971013) (cstrassign.pas); pass those arrays as cstrings in read*, write*, str (P_*STRING; current length=-1 in two places); compile time warning (and treatment as non-zero-based) if it's not clear at compile time if a conformant array or schema is zero-based or not, and an operation depends on this in the zero-based state
@item Short strings (Length, Capacity) and switches (tc19980326.2,tc19980327); allow @samp{type x=string} (undiscriminated) when switch is set so that strings don't default to length 255 (fh19971113) (cf. fjf97.pas); don't add a #0 terminator when passing as a CString parameter (automatically use String2CString)
@item automatically convert CStrings to Strings?
@item general switch @samp{--bp-strings}
@item ``wide'' characters
@item open array/string parameters (@samp{$P}, @samp{$V} in BP; undocumented @samp{OpenString} identifier in BP)
@item variables of type undiscriminated schema/strings -> remove pointers to string constants; functions returning undiscriminated schemata (pg19980813.3)
@end itemize

@node Planned - OOP
@subsection Planned features: OOP

@itemize @bullet
@item Object Oriented Extensions draft, Delphi; @samp{class}; allow classes and object types to inherit from each other; <01BD7A3A.6B187A20.prucha@@helicon.co.at>; @file{obpascal.zip}
@item error/exception handling (Java, Delphi?) <01BD7A3A.6B187A20.prucha@@helicon.co.at> (tc20000623)
@item method pointers/procedural variables (@samp{procedure/function of object}) (-> Delphi) ???
@item destructor: reset VMT link to nil ???
@item @samp{@var{class} is @var{class}} (implemented in Pascal with @samp{Parent})
@item BP compatible dynamic method dispatcher ?? ???
@item @samp{New}: Delphi syntax; Dispose?? (automatically?; set references automatically to nil) (-> FPC)
@item @samp{--base-class=foo}, @samp{--base-object=bar} ???
@item properties <01BD7A3A.6B187A20.prucha@@helicon.co.at>, <16131.199805071354@@potter.cc.keele.ac.uk>
@item VMTs (also for local classes (EP modules???)!) in GPI files, written to assembler file by main program; @samp{--cfiles=foo}: .s file with VMTs for C/assembler??? (also .h???)
@item method overloading ??? ??
@item interfaces (cf. OOE, Java); @samp{@var{obj} is @var{interface}} (not so easy?) ???; variables of type pointer to more than one interface [and class] (also possible!); VMT problem with interfaces (my solution??? also with dynamic linking???)
@item virtual constructors; in interfaces (load)???
@item VMT: Children: list of pVMT
@item VMT: object constants, class variables; virtual/static
@item VMT: ClassID (64/128 bits?) default 0, error when duplicated, warning when 0 and inherited from class with <>0 ?, not allowed for abstract classes!; ClassName (also for abstract classes?); []; ProgrammerID, BaseClassID at beginning of unit (redeclarable?); find class by ClassID/ClassName (implementable in Pascal with @samp{Children}); store in GPI: whether ClassID used, ClassName used, which classes are instantiated ???
@end itemize

@node Planned - Other types
@subsection Planned features: Other types

@itemize @bullet
@item variant records: EP: check that all values of tag-type have exactly one matching variant
@item automatically detected upper array bounds in structured constants/intialized variables (-> PXSC)
@item UCSD Pascal's @samp{Integer[n]} ??? BCD?
@item @samp{SELECTED_REAL_KIND} for real types (cf. Fortran, drf) ?? ???
@item general subtypes ???
@item type-cast operators ???
@item read/write operators ???
@item read Booleans and enum types from files, write enum types to files ???
@item sparse sets; sets of arbitrary types ?? ???
@item initalization and finalization code for arbitrary types (e.g. GMP types)
@item resize schemata (cf. @samp{SetLength} in Delphi)
@item @samp{ShortComplex}, @samp{LongComplex} <Pine.GSO.4.44.0207151258290.5058-100000@@bonsai.fernuni-hagen.de>
@item keep files in FDRList while they live, not only while they're open, so @samp{DoneFDR} can be applied to all of them ???
@item improve TFDDs
@item generic types (cf. OOE section C.1) (gentypes.pas) ???
@end itemize

@node Planned - Misc
@subsection Planned features: Misc

@itemize @bullet
@item checking of overflows, variants etc.; check that strings converted to CStrings don't contain #0 characters; initialize strings (length field), pointers, ordinal values and reals(?) with invalid values if checking is on
@item warn about using uninitialized variables (kevin2.pas), especially for strings, also for @samp{for}-loop counters after the loop (EP 6.8.1)
@item transpose arrays (Fortran)? <918557$mke$1@@nnrp1.deja.com>
@item inline functions in GPI files
@item options to warn about everything that could cause portability problems
@item libraries (static/shared; DLL) <Pine.HPP.3.96.971110183550.7996B-100000@@tea.geophysik.tu-freiberg.de>
@item smart linking (split @file{foo.s}, as @file{foo*.s}, ar @file{foo*.o} or split @file{foo.o})
@item overloading of unary operators (@samp{+}, @samp{-}, @samp{not}) ???
@item function overloading (in units and static methods?? -- with different parameters, override or overload?); linker name?? (perhaps: first occurrence of a procedure with normal name (=> all non-overloaded procedures get normal names)?); cf. Delphi methods without @samp{override}
@item @samp{for var: type = foo to bar do} ???
@item default parameters (cf. OOE section C.4; Delphi 4?) (iniparm[12].pas) <E183vio-000IyH-00@@f12.mail.ru>
@item variable number of arguments <32F9CFE7.5CB@@lmemw.ericsson.se> ?? ???
@item multithreading support ?? ???
@item @samp{--wirth-pascal} :@minus{})
@item PXSC standard @dots{} (@file{pxsc.zip}, @file{contrib/peter/pxsc}) (??)
@item Pascal++ standard @dots{} (??) ???
@item Delphi features: CompToCurrency, CurrencyToComp, Slice, TypeInfo ???, dynamic arrays (tc19991012)
@item output column numbers in error messages ??
@item debug info: @samp{with} statements
@end itemize

@node Planned - Utilities
@subsection Planned features: Utilities

@itemize @bullet
@item @samp{gp} make utility to replace automake; @samp{external @var{lib}} like @samp{$L} (-> BP, Delphi) ?? (fh19990325.2)
@item @samp{pas2texi} <200301290441.FAA30843@@goedel.fjf.gnu.de>
@item C header to Pascal translator
@item gdb: Pascal types (sets, files, subranges, schemata, @dots{})
@item @samp{indent}-like source code formatter for Pascal
@item AT&T <-> Intel assembler syntax converter (-> BP BASM) ???
@end itemize

@node Fixed Bugs
@section Problems that have been solved

This section lists the bugs fixed since the last (non alpha/beta)
GPC release, together with the date (YYYYMMDD) on which they were
fixed, so you can check if some problem has already been solved in a
recent release or developer version. For new features, see
@ref{News}.

@itemize @bullet
@item 20070903: Prevent multiple evaluation of some string expressions
(roland2.pas).
@item 20070903: Correct range checking for `Succ' and `Pred' applied to
enumerations (`fsc2[24].pas') on 64-bit machines.
@item 20070903: Check that procedures assigned to constant variables
are not nested (did not work with 4.x backends) (nicola4c.pas).
@item 20070903: On 64-bit machines range check for small unsigned subranges
failed to work (range2.pas and chuck6.pas).
@item 20070902: Allow copy on function values (copy1.pas).
@item 20070831: Do not ICE on break outside loop (affected 4.x backends)
(russ5[ab].pas).
@item 20070830: Fix crash for some initializers (affected 4.x backends)
(igor2.pas).
@item 20060830: Allow jumps into blocks when `--no-iso-goto-restrictions'
is in force (goto9[cd].pas).
@item 20060722: Some initializers with nested strings were rejected
(velo1.pas).
@item 20060519: Correct some build problems.
@item 20060505: Local `R-' option affected rest of the file (gale12[a-h].pas). 
@item 20060424: Handle empty string in InternalStringOf (stro2.pas).
@item 20060304: Do not allow passing strings to parameters of type array of
char subrange (avoids passing out of range values).
@item 20060228: Use at least integer precision for arithmetic (avoids
loss of precision due to overflow)
@item 20060225: Avoid ICE on some record types
@item 20060225: Avoid segfault in bison parser
@item 20060214: Avoid ICE on unimplemented operators (ice4.pas)
@item 20060214: Avoid ICE on bad forward declaration (ice3.pas)
@item 20060214: ISO-10206 requires at least one output parameter
in `ReadStr' (rstr2a.pas)
@item 20060213: Allow side effects in arguments of `ReadStr' (rstr1.pas)
@item 20060213: Correctly pass substrings to `StringTFDD_Reset' (fjf1099.pas)
@item 20060213: Avoid ICE on multiple errors with set constants (constv2c.pas)
@item 20060213: Avoid ICE on bad parent class (delc.pas)
@item 20060212: fix passing of multiple string values to `const' conformant
arrays (confa2.pas)
@item 20060212: Avoid ICE on invalid conformant arrays (confa3.pas)
@item 20060212: Avoid confusing initialized variant records with conformal
arrays (confa1.pas)
@item 20060212: Avoid ICE on invalid set argument (sets16a.pas)
@item 20060212: Avoid ICE on incompatible arguments in binary operators
@item 20060212: gpc rejected some valid strings arguments (peter8.pas)
@item 20060208: In ISO modes check identifier scopes stricter in record
types and parameter lists (gale7[a-m].pas, gale8[a-u].pas)
@item 20060203: Fix problems with strange characters in some versions
of ncurses
@item 20060130: In ISO modes report out of range constants only at runtime
(range1.pas)
@item 20060130: make set literals and packed sets compatible (sets17a.pas)
@item 20060128: check `type of' argument more strictly in ISO modes
(gale9[abc].pas, gale10.pas, gale11[a-d].pas)
@item 20060128: in ISO-7185 mode require that program parameters are files (pparm1.pas)
@item 20060128: require digit after decimal point in ISO modes (real2.pas)
@item 20060128: in ISO modes allow sets inside packed records and arrays (pack13.pas)
@item 20060128: in ISO modes require parameters to `read' and `write'
(read3.pas, write3.pas)
@item 20060127: allow string literals in ISO-7185 mode (const1.pas)
@item 20060127: allow empty ranges in set constructors (sets18.pas)
@item 20060127: correct comparison of sets (sets15.pas)
@item 20051118: avoid crash when preprocessing (prep1a.pas)
@item 20051118: define `__OS_DOS__' on Dos and Windows
@item 20051118: fix spurious warning about `-Wuninitialized'
@item 20051114: fix passing discriminated string schema
@item 20051105: constructor calls inside constructors and destructor
calls inside destructors
@item 20051104: allow testing when different GPC version using the same
backend is already installed
@item 20051025: correctly parse @samp{import foo; uses qualified;} 
(waldek15.pas)
@item 20051021: accept @samp{--no-methods-always-virtual}
@item 20051021: nonlocal jump fixes for 3.2.x and 3.3.x
@item 20051021: fix bootstrap with C++ and 3.3.x
@item 20051021: allow one element sets in non-iso dialects (delset.pas)
@item 20051021: do not crash on wrong open array parameter (waldek13.pas)
@item 20051014: `forward', `near' and `far' may be redeclared in all dialects
@item 20051014: Integer2StringBaseExt now works in 64-bit machines
(mir048[cd].pas)
@item 20051014: do not crash on bad declarations (dimwit1.pas, dimwit3.pas,
dimwit5.pas)
@item 20051014: avoid calling fcntl if not present (fjf1042b.pas, fjf1042c.pas
on Mingw32)
@item 20051014: sorting set initializers used wrong comparison function
(affected Solaris)
@item 20051014: avoid range-check failure in RTS on strict alignement
machines (affected at least Sparc and HP)
@item 20051014: mod in schema initializer (modtest.pas)
@item 20051014: avoid spurious side effects in initializers do to
range-checking (fjf1021[dh-k].pas)
@item 20051014: fix bootstrap with Ada and 3.4.x
@item 20051014: fix bootstrap with 3.2.x
@item 20050325: check initializers of unused types (fjf898*.pas)
@item 20050325: check identifier scopes stricter (az25.pas, fjf1059*.pas)
@item 20050321: in @samp{--borland-pascal} give only a warning, not an error, for duplicate @samp{case} elements (drf6*.pas)
@item 20050320: multi-dimensional @samp{packed} arrays are not correctly packed (fjf149*.pas)
@item 20050316: check arithmetical overflow in constants somewhat better (fjf206*.pas)
@item 20050316: check duplicate external declarations stricter (fjf948.pas)
@item 20050312: check that actual discriminants match in parameters and assignments, and in strict EP mode, check that actual discriminants of parameters within one identifier list match (berend4.pas, fjf104[45]*.pas, typeof[2-4].pas)
@item 20050312: check pointer to schema types stricter (fjf130.pas, fjf614.pas, schema3a.pas affected)
@item 20050311: allow importing the same value as a result of distinct expressions under the same name for EP modules for ordinal, pointer, string and set constants (fjf1040*.pas, stef1.pas)
@item 20050307: allow attributes for procedural types (chief56.pas)
@item 20050307: problem with string operations and @samp{goto} (contour0.pas, contourbug.pas, martin1.pas, berend3.pas)
@item 20050307: check @samp{goto} targets more strictly <261020020000077022%gpaeper@@empirenet.com>, <Pine.LNX.4.44.0210281004000.31943-100000@@duch.mimuw.edu.pl> (az48.pas, fjf701*.pas, fjf1038*.pas, gale6.pas)
@item 20050307: @samp{Result} is not completely Delphi compatible (fjf1022*.pas)
@item 20050307: problem if a @samp{Write} or @samp{WriteLn} argument calls a routine which writes to the same file (fjf1036.pas)
@item 20050302: @samp{Update} as well as writing after reading or checking @samp{EOF} can get the file position wrong in some cases (arp2*.pas, fjf159.pas, fjf160*.pas)

@item 20050217: declaring a procedure in the implementation with the same name as an imported procedure doesn't work (chief18.pas), detect name collisions between imported EP modules (mod9.pas)
@item 20050214: warn if an lhs cast decreases alignment (avo9.pas)
@item 20050214: don't require result variables in forward declarations except in strict ISO mode (marku10*.pas)
@item 20050213: writing to a file buffer at EOF doesn't work (eof1.pas)
@item 20050211: don't allow @samp{f^} for unopened files @samp{f} (pcerror[ij].pas)
@item 20050210: evalute initializers exactly as often as specified (fjf1019.pas)
@item 20050205: initialized types in record and object fields and in schemata (inirec[24].pas, fjf1016*.pas)
@item 20050130: in standard Pascal modes, @samp{EOF} is false on an empty file (tom7.pas)
@item 20050127: wrong @samp{arithmetical overflow} with @samp{set of byte} (igor1.pas)
@item 20050119: types and initializers containing variable expressions, including schemata with non-constant discriminants and global variables of dynamic size (couper[45].pas, fjf186.pas, fjf548.pas, fjf612a.pas, fjf997*.pas, fjf1003*.pas, john1a.pas)
@item 20050117: @samp{pow}, @samp{Trim}, @samp{Card}, set operations (@samp{-}, @samp{*}, @samp{><}) and comparisons as well as string comparisons and array slices with constant arguments cannot be used in constants (fjf998*.pas, fjf1000*.pas, fjf1009*.pas)
@item 20050117: @samp{ParamStr} evaluates its argument twice (fjf963b.pas)
@item 20050106: user-defined operators must not be applied to implicit operations (fjf991.pas and many other cases)

@item 20041203: accessing components of a constant (EP) constructor (indexed by a constant for arrays) must yield a constant again (dave3*.pas)
@item 20041202: GPC crashes when using two variables with identically-named fields in a single @samp{with} statement (withbug.pas)
@item 20041125: GPC doesn't accept @samp{case} statements without case-list-elements (fjf982*.pas)
@item 20041125: gcc-3.x: options are wrongly reordered (so, e.g., @samp{--gnu-pascal -Wno-underscore} doesn't work as expected) (avo7.pas)
@item 20041124: applying @samp{not} to a function result in parentheses doesn't work (avo6.pas)
@item 20041123: packed array indices containing @samp{mod} don't work (avo4.pas)
@item 20041120: GPC sometimes prints @samp{???} instead of the actual file name in messages
@item 20041028: function results (of record type) must not be allowed as @samp{with} elements (only a warning in @samp{--delphi} and @samp{--mac-pascal} modes for compatibility); fields of non-lvalue @samp{with} elements must not be lvalues either (fjf493*.pas)
@item 20041022: value parameters of type @samp{String} (undiscriminated) must take the capacity of the actual parameter, according to EP (waldek11*.pas)
@item 20041021: initialized types in arrays (fjf233.pas, fjf974*.pas)
@item 20041020: initializers are ignored in @samp{New} and @samp{Initialize} (fjf967[j-l].pas)
@item 20041020: the address of global routines is not allowed in initializers (avo2*.pas)
@item 20041015: @samp{Index} and @samp{Pos} cannot be used in constant expressions (fjf970*.pas)
@item 20041012: initializers of variant records don't work (fjf259.pas), (peter6.pas) <C1256791.0021F002.00@@synln01.synstar.de>
@item 20041012: initializers of packed arrays don't work (emil5.pas)
@item 20041007: the @samp{__FILE__} and @samp{__BASE_FILE__} macros should return full paths
@item 20041006: @samp{Sqr} sometimes evaluates its argument twice (fjf963a.pas)
@item 20041004: memory leak in routines with a local variable of file type that are left via @samp{Exit} or @samp{Return} (fjf962.pas)
@item 20040916: using a Boolean function as a condition in a @samp{repeat} loop doesn't work correctly (artur1*.pas)
@item 20040913: overstrict type-checking in comparisons involving procedural types (fjf960*.pas)
@item 20040908: @samp{Read}, @samp{Write} etc. evaluate its arguments in the wrong order (az43*.pas)
@item 20040908: @samp{Read} etc. evaluate references to string parameters twice (fjf958.pas)
@item 20040907: on targets with 16 bit @samp{Integer} type, the @samp{MicroSecond} field of @samp{TimeStamp} causes a compilation error
@item 20040907: character arrays indexed by non-integer ordinal types treated as strings cause internal compiler errors (fjf957*.pas)
@item 20040906: @samp{-W[no-]cast-align} does not work (fjf956*.pas)
@item 20040903: in @samp{FormatTime} @samp{%Z} and @samp{%z} unless provided by system library ignore DST
@item 20040710: powerpc: @samp{--strength-reduce} doesn't work with @samp{for} loops (was kludged before, fixed in gcc-3.3.3)
@item 20040710: AIX: @samp{ReturnAddress} doesn't work after use of dynmamic variables (backend bug, fixed in gcc-3.3.3)
@item 20040622: functions returning sets are called twice if range-checking is on (inga1*.pas)
@item 20040512: @samp{pow} and @samp{**} are really EP conformant now (in particular @samp{x pow y} and @samp{x ** y} are an error if x = 0 and y <= 0) (emil27*.pas)
@item 20040511: bug with @samp{absolute} variables in strange situations (waldek8.pas)
@item 20040511: @samp{protected var} parameters must only accept references (unlike @samp{const} parameters) (gale5*.pas)
@item 20040507: @samp{pack} must not pack the component type of arrays (fjf940[b-e].pas)
@item 20040507: in some circumstances packed fields are allowed as @samp{var} parameters (fjf940a.pas)
@item 20040427: parameters of procedural types don't support Standard Pascal procedural parameters, conformant/open arrays and @samp{type of} inquiries (fjf939*.pas)
@item 20040422: bugs with nonlocal gotos out of routines declaring file variables (nonloc*.pas) (fix involved a change in the internal representation of file variables)
@item 20040331: @samp{'foo'#42} is rejected in @samp{--borland-pascal} (chief53.pas)
@item 20040330: records/objects with many fields are handled slowly
@item 20040328: @samp{--implementation-only} doesn't work correctly (bo4-19.pas)
@item 20040325: messages referring to object methods point to the end of the object type rather than the method declaration
@item 20040325: bug when slice-accessing a function result of type @samp{Pointer} type-casted to @samp{PString} (bo4-18.pas)
@item 20040210: incorrect errors with packed arrays and records (fb[12].pas, gale[34].pas)
@item 20040204: GPC crashes on @samp{else} after a missing semicolon in some circumstances (fjf926.pas)
@item 20031007: spurious errors about @samp{result types in forward declared functions} in @samp{--extended-pascal} etc. (dave2.pas)
@item 20031004: do not allow disposing of @samp{nil} pointers in standard Pascal modes (fjf917*.pas)
@item 20031001: arithmetic expressions don't work as lower array/subrange bounds (fjf204.pas, fjf248.pas, fjf293.pas, fjf336.pas, fjf346a.pas, fjf622.pas)
@item 20030925: initializers for types containing nested schemata don't work (fjf914*.pas)
@item 20030830: open internal files with @samp{O_EXCL} on @samp{Rewrite} (as a protection against symlink attacks)
@item 20030819: GPC accepts, but ignores, options with invalid suffixes (e.g. @samp{--delphi-pascal})
@item 20030729: @samp{pow} and @samp{**} are EP conformant now (in particular @samp{x pow y = (1 div x) pow (­y)} if @samp{y} is negative and @samp{x <> 0}) (fjf908.pas)
@item 20030714: @samp{--enable-keyword}/@samp{--disable-keyword} on the command-line makes GPC crash (david5.pas)
@item 20030704: wrong type-error when applying @samp{Inc} to a type-casted pointer (peter3.pas)
@item 20030702: with range checking enabled, check dynamic subrange/array size (fjf222*.pas, fjf813*.pas, fjf900*.pas)
@item 20030701: GPC allows modification of conformant array bounds, result of @samp{High}/@samp{Low} etc. (fjf897*.pas)
@item 20030626: don't allow linker names starting with a digit (fjf894.pas)
@item 20030625: @samp{SubStr} with constant arguments doesn't work in constants (gale1.pas)
@item 20030617: handle @samp{BitSizeOf} correctly for packed array fields, don't allow @samp{SizeOf} on them (fjf891*.pas)
@item 20030612: System: @samp{BPReal} must be a packed record <3EE8A26D.C919BE7D@@flexim.de>
@item 20030610: schema types with initializers (drf1.pas, fjf886*.pas)
@item 20030610: @samp{Return} doesn't work for sets (fjf885.pas)
@item 20030609: bug with arrays as fields of @samp{packed} records (waldek6.pas)
@item 20030607: don't allow duplicate imports in a module interface and implementation (nick1b.pas)
@item 20030604: compensate for parser read-ahead in the lexer, so compiler directives don't become effective too early and error messages refer more closely to the correct source position
@item 20030603: bug when dividing two integers with @samp{/} (fjf481.pas)
@item 20030509: don't allow @samp{absolute} in type definitions
@item 20030502: subranges with variable limits (couper[23].pas)
@item 20030502: Sparc with gcc-2.95.x: @samp{goto} jumping out of two procedure nesting levels doesn't work (GCC bug; fixed in gcc-3) <200111170922.KAA09125@@goedel.fjf.gnu.de> (fjf558[op].pas) (fixed with gcc-3 or when using @samp{--longjmp-all-nonlocal-labels})
@item 20030502: the parser does not always recover well after a parse error <199911040915.KAA11168@@humulus.daimi.au.dk> (fixed the case given in this report; if there are other cases, please report)
@item 20030501: detect conflicts between object fields and local variables in methods
@item 20030430: packed array/record fields don't work in @samp{Read} etc. (tom5.pas)
@item 20030430: file parameters must not automatically be bindable in @samp{--extended-pascal} (fjf193[c-e].pas)
@item 20030423: give an error rather than a warning when casting between types of different size in @samp{@{$X-@}}
@item 20030423: simplify code generated to compute size of dynamical variables if no bitfields are involved (ok with gcc-3)
@item 20030422: initialized object variables don't work (fjf445*.pas)
@item 20030422: declarations of a module interface are not visible in the implementation (kevin13.pas, mod12.pas) <Pine.BSI.3.96.971110210330.7570A-100000@@malasada.lava.net>
@item 20030422: detect invalid array slice access with constant indices at compile-time (peter2*.pas)
@item 20030421: automatically close dynamically allocated files on @samp{Dispose} and files declared in a statement block at the end of the statement block <6r9ir5$7v5$1@@nntpd.lkg.dec.com> (fjf219[a-d].pas, fjf502.pas)
@item 20030421: initialize local static variables in the main constructor, not in each routine call (fjf458*.pas)
@item 20030421: check parameter and result variable names in repeated forward etc. declarations <20010321204051.A611@@plato> (fjf284.pas, markus8.pas, fjf850*.pas)
@item 20030417: modifying @samp{for}-loop counters within the loop or in a subroutine is not allowed <200005240807.EAA05355@@mail.bcpl.net>, <Pine.LNX.4.44.0210281004000.31943-100000@@duch.mimuw.edu.pl> (az47.pas, fjf837*.pas)
@item 20030417: possible stack overflow when using string concatenation in a loop (fjf419*.pas, fjf345e.pas, fjf460b.pas) -- breaks berend3.pas (less important because strange test case, and just another instance of existing contourbug.pas)
@item 20030416: some functions in boolean shortcuts are always called (fjf226*.pas)
@item 20030414: label declarations must not be allowed in unit/module interfaces and module implementations (but in unit implementations, BP compatible, though we don't allow nonlocal @samp{goto}s into the constructor) (fjf835*.pas)
@item 20030321: variables declared in interfaces of modules are not initialized (capacity of strings etc.) (daj3.pas, sven14c.pas, nick1.pas)
@item 20030321: subranges whose size is exactly one or two bytes are not packed in packed arrays (daj14a.pas)
@item 20030321: @samp{prior parameter's size depends on `Foo'} with @samp{const} string parameters in module interfaces (fjf667.pas)
@item 20030313: operators don't always work across units (fjf803.pas)
@item 20030312: overloading @samp{<=}, @samp{>=}, @samp{<>} and some certain words doesn't work (fjf789.pas, fjf794*.pas, fjf800.pas, fjf802.pas, fjf804.pas)
@item 20030311: when passing a schema variable as an untyped argument, the whole schema, including the discriminants is passed (fjf798.pas)
@item 20030302: discriminant identifiers as variant record selectors
@item 20030227: GPC crashes when taking the address of local variables in an initializer (nicola4*.pas)
@item 20030225: the warnings about uninitialized/unused variables don't work for strings, objects, etc. (fjf779*.pas)
@item 20030221: gcc-2.95.x: @samp{configure --silent} doesn't work (passes wrong options to sub-configures, so the subsequent make fails) (GCC bug; fixed in 3.x)
@item 20030215: forward referencing pointers generate debug info that appears as generic pointers
@item 20030202: count of parameters in error messages should not include @samp{Self} in methods or internal parameters for conformant or open arrays
@item 20030129: check for unresolved @samp{forward}, interface and method declarations (az32.pas, fjf758*.pas)
@item 20030129: several standard conformance bugs (az@{1..24,26..42,44..46@}*.pas, emil23*.pas)
@item 20030126: some bugs with complicated schema usage (emil22*.pas, fjf750*.pas)
@item 20030122: subtraction of unsigned types with a negative result doesn't work (ml4.pas)
@item 20021229: declaring huge enum types and exporting subranges of them is very slow (quadratic time behaviour); some bugs regarding exporting of subranges (fjf736*.pas)
@item 20021213: Linux: @samp{crtscreen} should react to @samp{SIGWINCH}
@item 20021120: @samp{Card} doesn't work with set constructors; @samp{Include} and @samp{Exclude} should not accept set constructors (eike3*.pas)
@item 20021105: type initializers are not type-checked until a variable of the type is declared (fjf704.pas); with gcc-2.x: bug when variables of a type with initializer are declared locally in more than one routine (couper13.pas)
@item 20021105: @samp{packed object} should not be allowed (fjf703.pas)
@item 20021101: bug when replacing a non-virtual method by a virtual one in a descendant object type (fjf702.pas)
@item 20021027: classic Pascal does not know the empty string <Pine.LNX.4.44.0210181332470.29475-100000@@duch.mimuw.edu.pl> (fjf693*.pas)
@item 20021027: relational and exponentiation operators have no associativity <Pine.LNX.4.44.0210210807410.18095-100000@@duch.mimuw.edu.pl> (fjf692.pas, fjf566[k-m].pas)
@item 20021002: @samp{gpc -B@var{dir}} requires a trailing dir separator
@item 20021001: constructors are accepted as the argument to @samp{Dispose} (fjf674.pas)
@item 20021001: align file fields in packed records on machines with strict alignment requirements (chief38*.pas)
@item 20021001: bug on machines with strict alignment requirements <199906021618.MAA06228@@sten27.software.mitel.com> (richard1.pas)
@item 20020930: duplicate variable declarations are allowed
@item 20020929: @samp{attribute}s of variables are ignored (fjf673.pas)
@item 20020929: @samp{volatile} for @samp{external} variables without @samp{asmname} is ignored (fjf672.pas)
@item 20020926: numbers with base specifiers are allowed as labels (fjf417*.pas)
@item 20020923: System: @samp{MemAvail}/@samp{MaxAvail} can go into an endless loop
@item 20020920: the number of times the preprocessor is invoked by the automake mechanism might grow exponentially with the number of units involved <02091610572303.14626@@dutw54.wbmt.tudelft.nl>
@item 20020918: importing @samp{StandardOutput} etc. in the interface of a module doesn't work (sietse2*.pas)
@item 20020904: comparisons between signed and unsigned integers sometimes give wrong results (eike2.pas, fjf664.pas, martin5.pas)
@item 20020903: @samp{IOSelect} fails with file handles >= 8 on some systems (e.g., Solaris) (fjf663.pas)
@item 20020831: GPC creates wrong debug info for many built-in types <200208280012.g7S0CWj07637@@mail.bcpl.net>
@item 20020827: comparisons of @samp{packed} subrange variables don't work right (martin4[ab].pas)
@item 20020824: operators defined in units don't always work (maur11.pas)
@item 20020824: object methods that contain an ISO style procedural parameter forget the implicit @samp{with Self do} (fjf662a.pas)
@item 20020615: @samp{if Pass[i] in 'A' .. 'Z'} makes GPC crash (miklos6.pas)
@item 20020603: compiling a program (not a unit or module) with @samp{--interface-only} or @samp{--syntax-only} segfaults (waldek1.pas)
@item 20020603: @samp{--nested-comments} fails without @samp{-Wall} (waldek2.pas)
@item 20020514: powerpc: @samp{--strength-reduce} doesn't work with @samp{for} loops [kludged now]
@item 20020514: guarantee complete evaluation in @samp{@{$B+@}} mode (fjf552*.pas)
@item 20020514: spurious warning with @samp{for} loops using a @samp{ByteCard} counter (toby1.pas)
@end itemize
