@c Copyright (C) 1996-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Authors: Peter Gerwinski <peter@gerwinski.de>
@c          Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 2006-01-30 (file up to date)

@ifclear READMEONLY
@ifclear NEWSONLY
@node Welcome
@unnumbered Welcome to GNU Pascal @dots{}
@dots{}
@end ifclear
@end ifclear
@ifset READMEONLY
@include version.texi
@c Note: The following line gets inserted into the destination file,
@c       it does not apply to this Texinfo file!
This file was generated automatically from welcome.texi.@*
@sc{DO NOT CHANGE THIS FILE MANUALLY!}

@settitle README
@node Top
@paragraphindent 0
@center Welcome to GNU Pascal,
@end ifset
@ifset NEWSONLY
Welcome to GNU Pascal,
@end ifset
the free 32/64-bit Pascal compiler of the GNU Compiler
Collection (GNU CC or GCC). It combines a Pascal front-end with
the proven GCC back-end for code generation and optimization.
Other compilers in the collection currently include compilers for
the Ada, C, C++, Objective C, Chill, FORTRAN, and Java
languages. Unlike utilities such as p2c, this is a true
compiler, not just a converter.

This version of GPC corresponds to GCC version @value{GCCVersion}.

@include purpose.texi

@ifclear READMEONLY
@ifclear NEWSONLY
This manual contains

@itemize @bullet
@item
an overview of some of GPC's most interesting features, see @ref{Highlights},
@item
a list of new features since the last release, see @ref{News},
@item
the GNU Pascal Frequently Asked Questions List, see @ref{FAQ},
@item
installation instructions, see @ref{Installation},
@item
a QuickStart Guide for programmers used to the Turbo Pascal/Borland
Pascal compiler, see @ref{Borland Pascal},
@item
a list of command-line options to invoke the compiler, see @ref{Invoking GPC},
@item
the Programmer's Guide to GPC, describing the Pascal programming language
in general and GPC specifc aspects, see @ref{Programming},
@item
the alphabetical GPC language reference, see @ref{Reference},
@item
a list of keywords and operators supported by GNU Pascal, see @ref{Keywords},
@item
information on how to report bugs in GNU Pascal and how to get support,
see @ref{Support},
@item
the list of known bugs and things to do, also listing bugs fixed
and features implemented recently, see @ref{To Do},
@item
some information for those who are interested in how GNU Pascal
works internally, see @ref{Internals},
@item
a list of contributors which tells you who developed and is
maintaining GNU Pascal, see @ref{Acknowledgments},
@item
the GNU General Public License which informs you about your rights
and responsibilites when using, modifying and distributing GNU
Pascal, see @ref{Copying},
@item
and other texts about Free Software and the GNU Project intended to
answer questions like ``what is GNU?'' you might have in mind now,
see @ref{GNU}.
@end itemize

If you are familiar with Standard Pascal (ISO 7185) programming, you
can probably just go ahead and try to compile your programs. Also,
most of the ISO Extended Pascal Standard (ISO 10206) is implemented
into GNU Pascal. The Extended Pascal features still missing from GPC
are set types with variable bounds and discriminated ordinal schema as
schema discriminants.

If you are a Borland Pascal programmer, you should probably start
reading the QuickStart guide from BP to GNU Pascal,
see @ref{Borland Pascal}. If you are curious about the new features
GPC offers, you can get an idea in the overview of GPC highlights
(@pxref{Highlights}), and read in more detail about them in the
Programmer's Guide to GPC (@pxref{Programming}) and in the
alphabetical GPC Language Reference (@pxref{Reference}).

And, please, think about how you can contribute to the GNU Pascal
project, too. Please support our work by contributing yours in form
of example programs, bug reports, documentation, or even actual
improvements of the compiler.

All trademarks used in this manual are properties of their
respective owners.
@end ifclear
@end ifclear

@ifset READMEONLY
GNU Pascal has a home site in the World Wide Web,
@smallexample
@uref{http://www.gnu-pascal.de}
@end smallexample

GNU Pascal distributions can always be found there.

We prefer distributing GNU Pascal in source form because it gives
you the possibility to customize, improve, and maintain the compiler
by yourself (or to hire a programmer to do so for you). However, we
provide binary distributions for some platforms for your
convenience, in a subdirectory @file{binary}.

Compilation of GNU Pascal requires the GCC sources, not just an
installed copy of GCC.

Installing GPC (from sources or a binary) will create various files
in subdirectories of @file{/usr/local/lib}, which are used by the
compiler. It will also create @file{/usr/local/bin/gpc}, which is
the user-level command to do a compilation.

Please send comments, suggestions, and bug reports to the GNU Pascal
mailing list, @email{gpc@@gnu.de}. See the FAQ for details.

The GNU Pascal Manual which contains extensive documentation about
GPC is contained in the files gpc.info* (GNU Info format) in source
and binary distributions. You can read them with any info reader,
e.g.@: by typing @samp{info -f gpc}. The source of the manual is
provided in Texinfo format in GPC source distributions. From this,
you can recreate the Info version, and you can also create HTML and
PostScript versions. HTML and PostScript versions are also provided
on GPC's web pages.

The file @file{FAQ} contains the GNU Pascal FAQ (Frequently Asked
Questions) list. It should answer most of the questions you might
have about GNU Pascal.

The file @file{NEWS} lists changes to GNU Pascal since the last
release.

The file @file{AUTHORS} lists the authors and contributors to GNU
Pascal.

The file @file{COPYING} contains the GNU General Public License
under which GNU Pascal is distributed.

The file @file{COPYING.LIB} contains the GNU Lesser General Public
License under which certain libraries are distributed (see the
individual licensing notes).

The file @file{INSTALL} contains installation instructions.

The file @file{BUGS} describes how to run the GPC test suite and how
to report bugs.

The files mentioned in the following are part of the source code
distributions of GNU Pascal.

The file @file{ChangeLog} contains an edit history.

The directory @file{rts} contains the source code of GNU Pascal's
Run Time System. Its interface to Pascal programs is contained in
the file @file{gpc.pas}.

The directory @file{script} contains some scripts used by the GPC
maintainers and some scripts used during GPC's build process.

In the directory @file{doc} you can find the GNU Pascal
documentation in GNU Texinfo format. See @file{doc/README} for more
about that.

The directory @file{units} contains the GNU Pascal standard units,
some of which being portable replacements for Borland Pascal
standard units of the same name.

The directory @file{utils} contains some utilites used by or in
connection with GNU Pascal.

The directory @file{demos} contains demo programs illustrating some
of GNU Pascal's capabilities.

The directory @file{test} contains programs to test the compiler
during its development and installation.

Everything else belongs to GNU Pascal's source code.

All parts of the compiler are copyrighted (C) 1987-2006 by the Free
Software Foundation, Inc.@: (FSF).

GNU Pascal is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
any later version.

GNU Pascal is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with GNU Pascal; see the file COPYING. If not, write to the
Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place -- Suite 330, Boston, MA
02111-1307, USA.

Enjoy,

The GNU Pascal Development Team
@end ifset
